[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A controversial new study
may rewrite the history books
on how and when North
America was first populated.
This is "Gaia News."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Historians and archaeologists
have tried for years
to answer the question, how
did our ancient ancestors first
populate North America?
The most prevalent theory has
been the Bering Land Bridge,
that Ice Age migrants crossed
an ancient landmass from Siberia
to North America.
But a new theory states
that Ice Age migrants
may have used a series of
islands, the Bering Transitory
Archipelago, to
make the crossing
and use these islands
as stepping stones
to get to North America.
Using a method called a
retrospective sea level
mapping, the scientists
found evidence
of an archipelago
nearly 900 miles long
that existed up to
30,000 years ago.
This theory could debunk the
nearly 100-year-old land bridge
theory, change our understanding
of early human migration
to North America, and shine a
light on maritime technologies
they may have possessed.
Science and history writer
Andrew Collins on this theory.
>> The significance of this
latest theory is that we now
have another means for people to
have traveled from the Eurasian
continent into the American
continent at a very,
very early date.
We're talking as much as
20,000 to 30,000 years ago.
What we're suggesting
now is that there
were a series of islands along
the edge of that Bering Land
Strait, and that our earliest
ancestors were using these
to island hop from Asia all
the way into North America.
>> Since the 1930s, the Bering
Land Bridge theory has been
the most commonly accepted idea
explaining ancient migration
into North America, believed
to be about 13,000 years ago.
But in recent years, newly
discovered archaeological sites
have found evidence of
settlements thousands of years
before this time.
Why hasn't this island hopping
theory been explored before?
>> One of the reasons why this
has not been properly looked
at before is because it
gives our ancestors maritime
capabilities, which a lot of
archaeologists are not happy
to accept.
But I think that as we now know
that the Neanderthals, possibly
even Homo erectus, were
navigating across straits
as much as 50 to 60 miles in
different parts of the world
in the past, that
there's no reason why
our own modern human ancestors,
or indeed, those of hybrids,
like Denisovan or even
Neanderthal hybrids
with modern humans
could not be achieved
in those same maritime
capabilities 30,000 years ago
is probably a
little silly today.
>> As new evidence is uncovered
that predates the existing
mainstream timeline of
history, why would it be
so controversial to re-examine
the data we've had for years?
>> The reason why American
archaeologists cannot accept
that people were in North
America prior to about 20,000
years ago is simply because it's
so far away from the so-called
pre-Clovis, or the
Clovis horizon,
which is to date around
13,000 years ago,
that it's anathema to them.
And yet, you ask many
of these archaeologists,
and they will say that they've
discovered even older tools,
going back to 30,000 years,
possibly even 50,000 years,
at these sites.
But they can't bring
them to the fore,
because they would
be so controversial
that these
archaeologists would lose
their positions at universities,
institutions, places like that.
So they'd rather just ignore
them for the time being
and concentrate
on the tools found
that are after
20,000 years ago down
to the time of the Clovis
horizon, about 13,000 years
ago.
>> So what does this all mean?
As we gain a better
understanding of our human past
and learn how we got here, what
can we learn from this theory?
>> The big takeaway, I think,
from these latest ideas is that
it's pushing back the date that
modern humans first entered
the American continent,
and I mean properly.
There's been some archaeological
evidence from paleolithic sites
to suggest activity going
back 20,000 years, possibly
even older than that.
But now the archaeologists have
to sit up and take seriously
the idea that the
Americas were peopled
as early as 30,000 years
ago, and I would say
as early as 50,000 years ago.
>> Looking at the
bigger picture,
this theory is yet another
example that although some
theories might
stand for some time,
when new evidence
comes to light,
we should follow that thread
without prejudice in search
of the truth.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."